chauvet.jpg
Chauvet Caves
Location: Cave Paintings
By Unknown Prehistoric Man
Roughly 30,000 years ago. 
In the Ardeche Region of France
We really don't know hardly anything about it. It might have been a worship place or something like that. And it's the oldest known human art around, that too. 

willendorf.jpg
Venus of Willendorf
Limestone Sculpture
Unknown Artist
Paleolithic Art, from 28,000-25,000 BC
Found near Krems, Austria
Now in Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna. 
Probably a symbol of Fertility, as it's childbearing features are very emphasized. 

laussel.jpg
Venus of Laussel
Limestone bas relief
Unknown Artist
Paleolithic Art, from about 25,000 BC
Found in Dordogne Region of France
Probably a symbol for a fertility goddess or similar. 

brassempouy.png
Venus of Brassempouy
Mammoth Ivory Sculpture
Unknown Artist
Paleolithic art, from 26,000 to 24,000 BC
Found in La Grotte du Pape, France
Unclear use; probably for some kind of ceremonial or religious use. 

reserve.jpg
Reserved Heads
Limestone or mud from the banks of the Nile
First found in Dashar; most found in Giza
Built in Royal Workshops
Made between 2,551-2,469 BC
They were made for non-royals for after they died, so that their soul might go somewhere if something should happen to their body. 

sounion.png
Sounion Kouros
By Polymedes of Argos
Found in Delphi
Marble from Naxos
600 BC
Greek Sculpture
Now in Delphi Museum, Greece
You can see a lot of Egyptian influence in this. 

charioteer.jpg
Charioteer of Delphi
Found in Delphi
Greek Sculpture from bronze
From about 478 BC
In Delphi Archaeological Museum, Greece
This used to be part of a bigger sculpture with a horse and a chariot. That's why his legs are so long, so he could stand behind the chariot. The eyes were colored stones and had some gold in them, so that they looked more lifelike. This shows the beginnings of naturalism. 


discobolos.jpg
Discobolos, or Disk Thrower
Made by Myron
Roman Marble copy of Greek Bronze statue. 
~ 450 BC
In Glytothek Museum, Munich
This shows a lot of motion, unlike Egyptian sculpture, but does show the torso straight on but the feet sideways, from their most recognizable angles, like Egyptian paintings. 

leavetaking.jpg
Warrior's Leave Taking
Greek Vase in Red-figured Style
Made by Euthymides
~500 BC
Now in Antiquarium, Munich
Shows departure from Egyptian style, as the feet aren't sideways, for example.

parthenon.jpg
The Parthenon
Doric Style Temple
Built around 450 BC
Athens, Greece
It was a temple to Athena
This was a fine example of Greek architecture and the Doric order. It is surrounded by Doric columns. 
228 x 101.4 feet
Columns are 6.2 feet in diameter and 34.1 feet tall

dionysos.jpg
Triumph of Dionysos and the Seasons
Marble
260-170 AD
34 inches high
Roman Funerary Art
Now in Metropolitan Museum of Art
Notice that the Seasons are usually women, but here they are youth. 
40 human and animal carvings in high relief. 
Installed in Badminton House, Gloustershire, England in 1733

bust_man.jpg
Marble bust of a man
Mid first century
Marble
14 3/8 inches high
Metropolitan Museum of Art, NYC
He doesn't look like they tried to make him look better than he actually looked. His old wrinklyness shows how much he gave to the empire, so it was appealing to the Romans. 

antonius.jpg
Antonius Pius, adoptive father of Marcus Aurelius
Marble
Reigned 138-161 AD
Glytothek Museum, Germany
From about 150 AD
Look at the furrows around his brow and the crow's feet around his eyes. 

laocoon.jpg
Laocoon and his Sons
By Atandoros, Hagesandros, and Polydoros of Rhodes
Early first century AD
Marble
7 feet, 10.5 inches high
Vatican Museum
Used to be in Titus' Palace
Pliny the Elder wrote about it in his <em>Natural History</em>. He really seemed to like it. 
=============================================================================================
romanPainting.png
Villa of Livia Drusilla
Garden Frescos
In a decorated, windowless basement 15 km north of Rome. 
Discovered in 1863 in Prima Porta
Runs along all 4 walls and might have been used as a summer room. 
Shows strong knowledge of plants, but also an evergreen garden, underlining the artificial character of this style of painting. 

bayeux.jpg
Bayeux Tapestry
ca. 1092
Now in Bayeux, France
A picture-chronicle of the Battle of Hastings from the Norman perspective, in which the Normans beat the English and took over England. 
William, Duke of Normandy, defeated Harold of Wessex (fellow in the middle with the hawk) in 1066.
Made for Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, brother-in-law to William
19.5 inches high, 231 feet long
The Latin on this part says "And his [Harold's] soldiers went by horse to Bos"
There's lots of information in the notes about this; 
You'll probably want to know it. 
See <a href="http://www.evernote.com/l/AAU9h6d7RvhGZ4oUAS3R3i4auOihIox2mWo/" target="_blank">my notes</a> if you don't have your own. 
Also, <em>note bene</em> that you won't have to know exactly what's going on in each of these, but you'll be rewarded if you do, or you know what is written on them. Chances are, only one of the images from the Bayeux Tapestry is going to show up, and she'll want all the information about the tapestry in general. If you don't want to, you don't have to study every one of these slides about it; just this one will do you just fine, as long as you can recognize that something else is the tapestry (which is pretty obvious.).

bayeux8.gif
William and Odo dining
There is a bunch of stuff on the left, they are making the food
and the priest is blessing it, and on the right, it says they're about
to destroy a castle, I think, but she didn't talk about that, so don't worry about it. 

bayeux9.gif
Civilian Casualties
On the far left, I've got no idea what's going on. Then, someone's telling William
about Harold, presumably about his death. Then a house is getting burned, and that's all you
have to know about this. 

saintDenis.JPG
Abbey Church of St. Denis
Large Medieval Abbey Church in a suburb north of Paris
Used to be a Gallo-Roman cemetery
In about 475 AD St. Genevieve established a church on this site. It was replaced in the 
<strong>7th century</strong> by a much grander building on orders from Dagobert I, king of Franks

notreDame.jpg
Cathedral of Notre Dame
Example of Gothic Architecture
1163-1250 AD
Paris, France
Ms. Broer took a picture of it in 2011 and showed it to us. It is very similar the picture I have here, from the same angle,
but from across the Seine. So if you see that, maybe you can get some extra points and tell her the year she took it. 

trinity.jpg
Holy Trinity
Masaccio (Tommaso di Ser Giovanni di Simone, but you don't have to worry about that.)
1427
677 x 317 cm
In Santa Maria Novella Church, Florence, Italy
It's placed right opposite the entrance, so it looks like it's actually a real space. 
It shows God, the Holy Spirit, in the form of a dove (it looks like God's collar, but it's a dove), and Jesus, the three persons of God. There's also Mary and St. John. Jesus looks really realistic. There's also a sarcophagus and a skeleton that reminds the viewer that they will, someday, die, and they better damn well remember it.

davidDonatello.jpg
David
By Donatello
Bronze
Centerpiece of the first courtyard in Palazzo Madici
1430-1460
Bargello Museum in Florence, Italy
Excellent Example of contrapposto
First freestanding nude sculpture since antiquity. The medieval people thought that the soul was good and the body was evil, so they didn't make the body as much. It is also in contrapposto, which is interesting. That's, from her slide, "a representation of the human body in which most of the weight is shifted onto one leg, causing the shoulders and the arms to twist-off axis from the hips and legs." That's a page straight out of Greek antiquity. It's also hollow and bronze, which was very classical. David beat Goliath as the underdog with God's help, and Florentines identified with that because they too beat the Duke of Milan, ostensibly with God's help. So David symbolizes Florence, in a way. The Medici also thought that they were symbolized by David. 

judges.jpg
The Righteous Judges and the Knights of Christ
Jan Van Eyck
Wings from Ghent altar
Completed 1432
Cathedral St. Bavo in Ghent, Belgium

arnolfini.jpg
The Betrothal of Arnolfini, or Portrait of Giovanni Arnolfini and His Wife 
(It has two names because there isn't clarity as to whether it is, in fact, depicting a marriage. I'd remember The Betrothal (or Marriage) of the Arnolfini if I could only remember one.)
Jan Van Eyck
Tempura and oil on wood
1434
National Gallery, London
Look at the mirror and you can see the whole painting from behind, including two more people in front of the couple. Van Eyck's name is also written above the mirror. 
There is also a lot of detail in the dog, which is a symbol of luxury because they were expensive to keep. The case could be made, in fact, that the painting is about the guy's wealth. There's a really ridiculous amount of detail in this painting, like the scenes from the passion of Christ in the edge of the mirror. The dog is also interesting because it symbolizes fidelity in the marriage. There are also oranges which symbolize wealth because they were really expensive. They also don't have shoes on, which might imply that something sacred was going on, maybe their wedding. There is also a lot of attention to light and shadows, which is interesting. Van Eyck was very interested in shadows and not as interested in getting the people to look exactly right, the opposite of the Italian Renaissance. 
Also, the woman isn't pregnant; she's just holding up her dress. 

venus.jpg
The Birth of Venus
1483
Sandro Botticelli
Tempura on canvas
172.5 cm x 278.5 cm
Painted for the Villa of Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco di Medici
Uffizzi Museum
Florence, Italy
See that they are all floating in the air. 
She's just about to be covered by this lady on the right. 
Some people think that this might be about reaching divine beauty by way of physical beauty. 

unicorn.jpg
La Dame a La Licorne
(The Lady and the Unicorn)
Wool and silk tapestry 
ca. 500
Aqcquired by the Musee Cluny from the Chateau Boussac in 1882
Still in Musee Cluny in Paris
Each of 6 tapestries represents one of 5 senses, with the 6th inscribed with "A mon seul desir," or "My only desire," in which temporal desires have been renounced. 

virginAndChild.jpg
Virgin and Child with Ste. Anne
Leonardo da Vinci
This is just a study; it's unfinished. This is a good example of chiaroscuro; you can see that there is dark darkness and bright lightness that really gives a sense of depth. There's also a kind of eternality, but that contrasts with the personality between the two women, Mary (the virgin) and Anne. You can also see the baby on the left, Jesus, blessing John, the other baby. 

monaLisa.jpg
Mona Lisa
Leonardo da Vinci
Also known as the Giocondo in Italian and La Joconde in French (it was thought to be a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo.)
Oil paint on poplar wood panel
Painted in Florence
In the Louvre in Paris
It was stolen on August 21 1911, then it was recovered in November 1913, about two blocks from the Louvre. 
It uses sfumato (smokiness) to dull the hard edges, and this makes it look to have more depth. 

virginRocks.png
Virgin on the Rocks
Leonardo da Vinci
2 versions; one in the Louvre in Paris, and one in the National Gallery in London
So, there are two because one guy commissioned one, but he didn't have the money, so he didn't get it, and someone else bought it, but the first guy still wanted it, so da Vinci had to make another one. 
The second version in the National gallery is also called the Madonna of Humility because it has Mary sitting on the ground instead of on a throne. This is also an example of sfumato, as you can see in the dark, hazy background. Also note that the babies were Jesus on the left and St. John on the right. 

narcissus.jpg
Narcissus at the Source
Caravaggio
1597-1599
Oil on canvas
Palazzo Barberini, Rome, Italy
Based off a story from Ovid about a boy who looks at his reflection in a pond and starves to death because he looks at it for so long. The dark background is an example of tenebrism. Some people really seem to think that his knee is really important, for some reason. You can also notice that his left hand is in the water, and he's about to fall in. 

calling.jpg
The Calling of St. Matthew
Caravaggio
ca. 1597
Oil on canvas
Contarelli Chapel, San Luigi dei Francesi, Rome, Italy
Christ is on the far right, pointing, and Matthew doesn't stand out, which is interesting. Matthew is being the tax collector, and people are paying debts. Matthew has the beard and the hat, and he is pointing at himself in disbelief. This instant of transformation is a common theme of baroque painting. It also looks like they're in the back room of a bar or something, which is interesting because it's not exactly divine; if it were happening today, they would probably be assumed to be mobsters or something. 


geographer.jpg
The Geographer
Johannes Vermeer
1669
Stadelsches Kinstinstitut un Stadtiche Galerie, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Oil on canvas
Notice the light source coming from the window. This was made during the age of exploration, symbolized by the globe and the carpet

